---
layout: single
title: "Generative Models"
twitter-image: /assets/posts/gan/gan-generative-models_card.png
excerpt: "A generative model simulates how the data is generated in the real world by learning a joint distribution over all the variables."
header:
  teaser: /assets/posts/gan/gan-generative-models_card.png
  overlay_image: /assets/posts/gan/gan-generative-models_header.png
  overlay_filter: 0.5 # rgba(255, 0, 0, 0.5), linear-gradient(rgba(255, 0, 0, 0.5), rgba(0, 255, 255, 0.5))

date:   2021-06-01 20:00:00 +0530
last_modified_at: 2021-07-27 20:30:00 +0530
categories: ML GAN
published: true

# table
toc: false
# toc_label: "Label goes here"
# toc_icon: "<some font awesome icon>"
toc_sticky: true

# sidebar
sidebar:
  - title: "Generative Adversarial Networks"
  - image: /assets/images/ml/gan-sidebar.png
    image_alt: "Images generated by GANs"

  - title: All posts
  - nav: ml-posts

  - title: See also
  - nav: other-posts
---

Generative models are a class of statistical models that try to learn the underlying structure of given data. This is different from discriminative models that try to discriminate between different types of data.

In machine learning, we assume the data X in any dataset comes from some underlying distribution p(X). When we are dealing with a supervised learning problem a data point x is associated with its corresponding label y, and data corresponding to each class of labels come from a different distribution P(X\|Y).

For example, let’s say we want to train an image classifier that can classify a given image as ‘cat’ or ‘dog’. We will train this model using a dataset of images with each image x having a corresponding label y - either ‘cat’ or ‘dog’. This classifier is an example of a discriminative model since it tries to discriminate the images of cats and dogs.

On the other hand, if we want to generate new images of dogs, we will need a generative model that can learn the properties of the underlying distribution of dog images and then sample new images from that distribution.

In the paper [An Introduction to Variational Autoencoders](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02691), the two types of models are described as follows:

> While in discriminative modeling one aims to learn a predictor given the observations, in generative modeling one aims to solve the more general problem of learning a joint distribution over all the variables. A generative model simulates how the data is generated in the real world. “Modeling” is understood in almost every science as unveiling this generating process by hypothesizing theories and testing these theories through observations.

In math terms: 

Generative models try to model the joint distribution p(X, Y) while discriminative models try to model p(Y\|X). You can see how generative models can be very powerful and we can get discriminative models from them whenever we want by conditioning on the input data. Unfortunately, making a good generative model is very difficult, as it has a much harder job to do, and if all we want to do is predict the labels for input data, then training a discriminative model is usually a much simpler process and requires less training data and training time.

Popular examples of generative models include Generative Adversarial Models (GANs), which we will see in the next sections, and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs).


# References

1. [[1906.02691] An Introduction to Variational Autoencoders (arxiv.org)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02691)

2. [Background: What is a Generative Model? (google.com)](https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/gan/generative)

3. [Generative Models (openai.com)](https://openai.com/blog/generative-models/)

4. [Build Basic Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) - Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/learn/build-basic-generative-adversarial-networks-gans)
